Betty Crocker is a cake mix brand.
And they can actually include dried eggs.
“You don’t need to add eggs either, for
we have added dried powdered egg for you in
it already!”
they could have proclaimed.
But it seems, users wanted to do something.
Some kind of creativity, some kind of hands-on,
I need to do, and only then I can claim this
cake-mix-cake to be something I created by
myself!
And, that is why, even though they could have,
they didn’t..
They said, just add eggs!
Interesting, is it not?
Namaste!
Four hundred and thirty nine!
Hidden Complexity!
Is there..
But ain’t there!
What is complexity?
Complexity is multiple things at the same
time.
Too many new things.
Something that is presented to me without
a match with a mental model that I already
have.
Something similar to what I already know..
making only a slight change to it.. provide
me with a map..
I don’t think anything will be complex.
Look at this joke!
“Tell me what you are good at?” asks the
interviewer.
The person answers with, “I can copy paste
and browse for something with patience!”
“That’s it then, You are hired!” says
the interviewer!
This appeared in the Cyanide and Happiness
cartoon strip.
What’s the job interview for?
Yes, it is a software developer interview.
Even if it sounds mocking and ridiculous,
deep down, every software engineer will agree,
every designer will agree too, the copy and
paste is probably sixty percent of their work.
They copy from somewhere else, they copy from
their own stuff, all the time!
No wonder then, this person deserves all the
respect he can get.
He has worked in Xerox, Amazon, Apple, and
Yahoo! Larry Tesler is his name.
The Father of Copy/Paste.
The person who gave birth to the CONCEPT.
Any idea how complicated this thing actually
is?
If you are copy pasting a file, the file clones
itself and relocates.
If a text is copied and pasted, the content
of the text is reproduced at the new cursor
insertion point.
If a part of an image is copied and pasted,
those pixels get re-painted in the same sequence
in the new location.
Infinitely powerful.
But, hiding under a very silly simple Control-C
Control-V, Command-C Command-V. Perhaps because
he was thinking about this all the time, he
came up with a law which has now become Tesler’s
Law.
What does it say?
There is a concept called the conservation
of complexity.
Whatever system you design, whatever software
you design, there is a basic amount of complexity
that you can’t do away with.
Either this complexity has to be encountered
while developing the product, faced, thought
about, refactored, broken up, made easier.
OR, if the product designer has done it in
a simple manner, the user, on the other side,
that person will suffer because of the complexity.
A developer may work for a week and solve
a problem for millions of users who will save
one minute of their time, a million minutes..
but if that effort had not been put on that
side (the developer’s side), in this side
(the user’s side) the effort would have
had to be put again and again and again!
The Law of Conservation of Inherent Complexity!
So, to face complexity, to hide it, to transcend
it and succeed in bringing users into their
‘product’, around the world I am picking
four examples, four interesting examples that
I encountered.
You share what you find!
Number One is Hiding Complexity.
I was really shocked when I came to know about
this.
Apple’s recent iOS.
Iphone Operating System release.
Very recently they have launched a feature.
Pretty powerful feature.
A feature so many of us would want..
But they didn’t tell anybody.
Go, find out for yourself.
When you stumble upon it, goosebump moments
galore!
Wow!
This afternoon, I tested it with two very
frequent phone users.
I asked them “Did you know!”
They said, “No!”
And then, when they explored and discovered
that feature, “Wow!”
What’s that feature?
This!
“In iOS 16, you could click on a photo and
then remove the person or the subject from
the background just like this and save it
or send it to anyone!”
Just like that!
Background removal in the Photos App.
Did you know!?
So, this is one way, hide the complexity.
People really interested in learning about
this, will stumble upon it, and learn it.
But, make it simple for everybody else.
This “make it simple for everybody else”
takes us to Number Two.
Number Two is “Make it simple for everybody
else, Make It Complicated for those who need
it.”
There is this piece of software called the
Chrome browser.
I am sure you have heard of it.
If you want to look at the Developer Console,
you just go to View, and down there, you see,
the Developer Options.
Chrome tells you, I actually help developers
do their work better.
But, this same feature, if you search for
it in Safari, you are not likely to spot it.
So, we may think, Safari probably is not a
developer-friendly browser.
Actually, no!
Do you know what you have to do?
In Safari, there is a Settings — Preferences
Pane where you have to turn it on, like that.
Show develop menu in the menu bar.
If you do that, then, look at that!
Up there, you see a Develop item in the top
menu!
And, more options!
It is actually more developer-friendly than
Chrome itself!
So, if there are hundred people, it is hard
to find even one developer among them.
Perhaps, one in a thousand.
Are you going to bother all thousand of them
with a developer menu, or.. are you going
to make it easy for the 999 people, and a
little more complicated for that one developer
lady who is looking to run some Javascript.
Here is a Third thing that you can try.
In the world, there were 22.2 million airplane
flights in the year 2022.
22 million flights.
And, the number of crashes?
Just nine.
Nine crashes in 22 million flights.
But, every flight, that lady, who is probably
bored to death, comes on stage, and bores
US to death with messages like “You have
to blow here, you have to wear like this,
it will drop, the exits are there..” — but
the rule, the flight safety, aviation safety
federation, they expect that every flight
that is operated may crash!
And, hence we have to be ready, even though
it is only nine in twenty-two million.
And, so, this has to be done without fail.
But, they didn’t dictate terms on HOW it
should be done, did they?
What if I do it like this?
If I make it a brand of who I am?
A proud demonstration of how we do things
differently?
That’s what this airlines did!
(Rap version of flight safety instructions)
Have you ever seen a group of passengers this
thrilled?
About flight safety instructions?
So, complexity, legal expectations, can be
rebranded also.
Southwest Airlines.
The last example I am giving you is probably
stretching things too much, but it was interesting
and falls under our category of hiding complexity.
See what happens!
We have seen this book earlier.
Tony Fadell is the author.
The person who famously designed the Apple
iPod.
He also designed and launched the Nest thermostat
/ camera monitor / fire safety devices.
Ended up selling the company to Google!
In this book, (we have encountered this book
earlier too), he talks about one particular
incident where he was about to take the Nest
Camera Monitor to the market.
“You can set it up in your baby room..
And if the baby moves, if the baby falls,
if the baby cries, you will get an alert!”
— Everything went fine until the legal team
came and said, “Ahem, we have forgotten
something.. this has a long cable.
And we will have to put this message.
It is a choking hazard.
A strangulation hazard.
The child may choke.
The child may be strangulated.
Problem.”
Tony Fadell was livid.
There is an App that goes with this device
and he had talked about the hazard in it.
The box it comes in?
He has talked about the hazard there.
Instruction manual?
Hazard notice clearly mentioned again.
Video on how to install?
Carries the hazard notice too.
But this guy said, “No way.
This is such a beautiful device.
I am not putting a warning sign like that.
With a baby being strangulated.
Being strangled to death.
No way!”
The legal team came over and begged him.
Please comply.
There will be stiff fines, otherwise.
He thought about it for long.
And, guess what he did?
Something very interesting.
He overdid it!
This is what he did!
He put the label very close to the product
itself!
Not at the end of the cable, but at the beginning.
He made the label twice the recommended side.
Unwieldy, eyesore.
He made it easy to tear off..
Unlike most stickers that are so hard to remove.
And finally, that amazing touch, … he ensured
that when the label comes off, it doesn’t
leave a sticky glue residue.
Basically, he made it very easy for users
to read it and do away with it.
So, you CAN follow the rules but you can STILL
save yourself from adding unnecessary complexity,
by overdoing it.
Don’t you agree?
As a closing thought, I want to talk about
this little book here called the God Equation,
by Michio Kaku.
This is something that for a very long time
has bothered Stephen Hawking.
Remember the movie that came, about him?
Theory of Everything.
Well, why did they name it that?
That is what he was in the pursuit of.
Something that combines electricity, magnetism,
gravity, quantum, .. something that puts all
this together and bring it up as governed
by a single theory.
And, before Dr. Hawking, it was Albert Einstein
who grappled with the Unified Field Theory.
So many great minds have struggled.
They haven’t found the answer yet.
No idea how long this would take either.
People are talking about the string theory
as the best candidate for the unified theory.
This Michio Kaku decided to write a book instead.
And, that, is the God Equation.
Alright.
Have a very simple uncomplicated life, until
we meet again next week!
Thank you!